was protected using one-time pad encryption, where the governments of the
US and the USSR would exchange extremely long keys using trusted couriers
carrying briefcases of paper on which random characters were written.
Notwithstanding the above, one-time pad encryption is rarely used nowadays because it has a number of drawbacks. Most prominent is that the key is
as long as the message.
2 This limits the usefulness of the scheme for sending
very long messages (as it may be difficult to securely share and store a very
long key), and is problematic when the parties cannot predict in advance (an
upper bound on) how long the message will be.
Moreover, the one-time pad—as the name indicates—is only secure if used
once (with a given key). Although we did not yet define a notion of secrecy
when multiple messages are encrypted, it is easy to see that encrypting more
than one message with the same key leaks a lot of information. In particular,
say two messages m, m0 are encrypted using the same (unknown) key k. An
adversary who obtains c = m ⊕ k and c
0 = m0 ⊕ k can compute
c ⊕ c
0 = (m ⊕ k) ⊕ (m0 ⊕ k) = m ⊕ m0
and thus learn the XOR of the two messages or, equivalently, exactly where
the two messages differ. This attack extends to more than two messages as
well, where it enables the attacker to learn the XOR of all pairs of messages.
While this may not seem very significant, it is enough to rule out any claims
of perfect secrecy for encrypting more than one message using the same key.
Moreover, if the messages correspond to natural-language text, then given
the XOR of sufficiently many pairs of messages—or even two sufficiently long
messages—it is possible to perform frequency analysis (as in the previous
chapter, though more complex) and recover the messages themselves. (See
Exercise 2.16 for an example.) An interesting historical example of this is
given by the VENONA project, as part of which the US and UK were able to
decrypt ciphertexts sent by the Soviet Union that were mistakenly encrypted
with repeated portions of a one-time pad over several decades
